This video is sponsored by Finnama is in this day and age,
we all know that we should be working smarter, getting our money to work for us.
But if you're anything like me,
that seems like a lot of time and a pretty long term commitment.
So how can we keep up with what's happening in the world of investing or more
basically, where do you start?
If you're completely new to the world of investing? Well,
this video is sponsored by [inaudible] and they can really help you with that
for demise is an app that was designed,
particularly with young busy people in mind.
The idea is to give you the information and tools you need to invest with
confidence and eventually empower you to become your own financial advisor.
We've been playing around with it for a couple of days.
So let me just share a few of the features with you. So as you'd expect,
they have the financial news packaged in the daily brief. Here,
you have options of text or audio summaries that you can easily digest on your
commute, or whilst you're walking the dock, but when you want to go deeper,
they also have these 100 plus packs.
I know that research was often a stumbling block for me.
It's just so time-consuming. But with these packs,
you really get a comprehensive outline of top industries or companies that you
may be looking at. Another thing I liked was the chat function,
where you can ask questions to others in the [inaudible] community.
And once you find your feet,
there are Q and a sessions with investing pros and analysts to in a nutshell,
Finnama is brings the biggest financial news and professional insights to young
investors in language people actually understand that's demystifying approach
carries over into the user experience as well.
I found their design really good and uncluttered overall.
It's a great tool for providing easy to digest, investing knowledge,
click on the link in the description to set yourself up with the free seven day
trial. So you can see for yourself.
I remember that you can cancel anytime even within the completely free seven day
trial.
And if you do want to subscribe all visual politic viewers will also get a 20%
off the premium, yearly subscription.
So check it out [inaudible] and now let's get into our video.
[Inaudible].
Coronavirus to pandemic is having a strong impact on economies around the world.
And therefore that impact is also taking its toll on the productive fabric,
Greater or lesser extent.
The vast majority of companies are experiencing a more than considerable
negative impact, decreased sales, lower margins, and a collapse in profits.
In fact.
It's the rate of business failures is the fastest since 2013 in the old
continent alone,
the European commission has calculated that the cost of the pandemic to
businesses could exceed 700 billion euros just for 2020.
Don't think that on the other side of the pond, the situation is different.
Not at all without looking too.
We have the case of the car rental company hurts a company that did not sustain
the onslaught of the coronavirus and had to declare bankruptcy.
So let's take a moment because their problems were not exclusively due to the
direct hit of the coronavirus.
What happened was that the company simply could not escape a huge pile of debt
of over $17 billion.
And of course it is by no means the only example that we can.
Fine.
Corporate debt is becoming a major concern,
a concern that has led the United States government itself together with the
federal reserve to intervene massively in 2020 to ensure the liquidity of the
productive.
Fabric, to give you an idea.
Among other measures, the us federal government put on the table, a
$500 billion small business loan program at the same time that the federal
reserve announced its intention to buy $750 billion. Of course.
Of course.
In addition to the risk of public outcry that this may pose,
this strategy offers no solution that goes beyond the most immediate problems
after all in the medium term,
it seems difficult to think that more debt is in itself,
a solution for companies whose problem was excess debt in the first place.
Many companies face solve and see risks that are not corrected through debt
over-indebtedness cannot be cured by more debt, no matter how cheap it is.
Excerpt from an August, 2020 report by Braven Howard hedge fund.
We are talking about an aftermath to the pandemic that could cause many,
many problems in the future.
Will this be the next crisis we face take note because many analysts share this
concern such as bill Ackman,
the well-known founder and manager of Pershing square capital management after
preempting the coronavirus in March and reaping a profit of $2.6 billion with an
operation that involved paying a premium of just $27 million in insurance
policies against default, he has set his focus squarely on corporate debt.
Ackman places, new bet against corporate credit.
And this new video made in collaboration with our friends from a value score.
We give you all the details.
A huge stock of debt.
At the end of October, 2019,
the international monetary fund issued a strong warning.
If no action was taken urgent measures would risk a new financial crisis in the
business sector, a new crisis that could in turn spreads to the bank.
Think sector.
According to the IMF itself, nearly $19 trillion of corporate debt.
Most of it owned by us companies could be vulnerable in the event of a material
slowdown in the economy. Yes, it is true that over the last few years,
debt has been cheap, but there is a lot of liquidity in the markets.
And also that interest unlike dividends is deductible. However,
crises often have the capacity to make debt radioactive when income collapses
interest begins to weigh more and more heavily on the income statement.
And obviously those due dates become a nightmare.
It's precisely what led to the IMF to issue that harsh warning.
At the end of 2019 back before the Corona virus pandemic hit the world economy.
And friends.
Obviously the business closures lockdowns and have caused many companies,
revenues and results to plummet this in turn has forced them to run to the
market for more debt to ensure liquidity look at what is happening with the debt
of companies, large, medium, and small in the United States.
[Inaudible].
Do you have an idea?
Michael Hartnett chief investment strategist at bank of America has estimated
that $2.5 trillion in corporate bonds will be issued in the United States alone
during the year 2020 that's trillions with a capital T 2.5 trillion.
It is.
That is equivalent. For example,
do practically all the annual production of the British economy, almost twice,
the value of the Spanish
Is not.
Or if we also take into account the relationship between net debt that is debt
minus cash and a bit profit before interest taxes, depreciation,
and amortization, U S companies have the highest financial leverage in decades,
right?
[Inaudible].
And keep one thing in mind,
as much as both the U S government and the federal reserve have intervened to
ensure liquidity. It may not do much good in the medium term.
An excess of debt usually ends up causing growth problems and even greater risks
of crisis.
This cycle.
Very different because we have a lot of support from central banks and we have a
lot of liquidity in the market,
but the old saying liquidity does not equal solvency is something that people
need to keep in mind when they are investing.
But I think that before we continue examining how things currently are and what
it could all mean, we need to take a look at how,
and when this whole culture of debts of unrestrained debt was set in motion,
where did it all begin? Listen up. The.
New culture of financial engineering.
This.
Story may have originated in the eighties,
a decade known among other things for the Reagan wave the music of Michael
Jackson and queen big hair pastorals and films like 80 back to the future.
And the empire story,
A decade that also had a, another very special characteristic,
the large-scale takeoff of financial engineering,
a process that had three main players.
Well, on the one hand professors, Franco Modigliani and Merton Miller,
who would go on to be the winners of the Nobel prize in economics,
two professors who presented a work that changed the landscape of financial
culture. It was the well-known M and M theorem by Modigliani.
[Inaudible].
You see up until that point,
the idea that depending too much on debt was an element of weakness and risk for
companies had always been widely accepted,
something that therefore diminished a company's value above that,
the work of these two professors, the opposite
Johnny Miller theorem States that the market value of companies has to do with
their ability to make a profit and the market risk of their underlying assets
and not with the manner in which they are financed.
And not only that since interest,
unlike dividends is deductible and therefore allows for less tax to be paid.
Suddenly debt is no longer seen as a risk, but as a means to add value.
In other words,
not resorting to high levels of debt could have a very high opportunity cost.
[Inaudible].
The fact is that this theory had an enormous impact on both the academic and
business worlds. And when interest rates began to fall,
many executives followed these guidelines to the letter.
They stepped on the accelerator and began to take on much more debt than had
previously been the case.
But wait a minute, because along with these two professors,
we have had to add the name of a third key player, Michael Milken,
a young bond salesman who reinvented the function of the market and became
popularly known as the King of junk bonds.
You see, as the head of the bond department at Drexel Burnham Lambert,
Michael Milken promoted the idea that investing in low credit rated companies
debt in exchange for high interest rates could be a very profitable investment
alternative. So in order to encourage that activity,
he led the creation of a specific secondary market for issuers of these types of
bonds, popularly known as junk bonds,
and this way for every bond traded in this market, the, from Drexel Burnham,
Lambert pocketed, a generous premium,
which made it one of the most profitable corporations on wall street.
In the eighties,
we are talking about a market that was valued at more than $200 billion at the
time companies with problems or medium and small businesses found in this
procedure is a huge story.
Funding.
And then what happens to happen happened issues of this particular type of low
rated debt increased 25 fold from just over 1 billion a year in the early
1980s to levels above $25 billion a year. Of course, in the last two decades,
this kind of new debt culture has been joined by another key intervention that's
of the central bank.
Since the beginning of the new century, in order to face first the.com crisis,
then the financial crisis and later to stimulate economic growth,
central banks have squashed interest rates to almost 0% levels.
Look for example, at how the rates set by the federal reserve happened.
[Inaudible], that's not all.
It an eight and more particularly in 2020,
the central banks have implemented another type of strategy known as
quantitative easing policies or strategy consisting of creating new money and
using it to buy hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollars in debt assets,
mainly public debt, but also private.
This goes some way to explaining why since 2008,
the monetary base of the United States has multiplied by more than five,
going from about 840 billion to more than $4.7 trillion. And the,
of the big central banks, including the European central bank,
I've done practically the same thing.
Friends.
This policy is precisely what explains news headlines.
This
pandemic sends real yields on corporate debt into negative territory,
low interest rates and monetary stimulus dragged down yields of high quality
bonds.
So Lawrence, we have such a scenario.
How can we not launch ourselves into devouring more and more debt? Well,
the result of this entire new culture is obvious. While four decades ago,
almost 72% of all companies rated by standard and pours had a rating above
eight. Today, those companies represent less than 14% of the total. In fact,
at the global level,
there are currently more companies qualified with a speculative grade.
Then we have an investment grade that is to say those with at least a triple B
rating.
But that said,
the burning question is what exactly is the situation we are facing? Well.
Let's take a look, a tidal wave of debt.
Combined debt of us companies not only exceed $17 trillion,
but also has an increasingly poor rating.
That is to say everything indicates that the debt weighs more and more heavily
that's in spite of the fact that interest rates are coming down.
[Inaudible].
Even among companies that do receive an investment rating,
the largest issuances of debt correspond to companies with a triple B rating is
companies that are only one step above what is considered to be a speculative
grade, very close to what many would call junk.
[Inaudible].
Give you an idea.
Ruchi is Sharma chief global strategist at Morgan Stanley investment management
estimates that one in six us companies does not generate enough cashflow to
cover the interest payments on its debt. One out of six companies,
Four we're talking about companies that are very exposed to any financial
problem that drives up markets and prevents them from attracting new financing.
They are what is known as zombie companies, companies.
So indebted that they barely have any margin to invest transform or resist the
tide. If the market becomes difficult.
[Inaudible].
Then as if that were not enough, there is another problem.
Low interest rates are driving investors to take more and more risk in their
portfolios to try to generate higher returns.
So what we find therefore is a progressive deterioration of the quality of many
portfolios while it's us companies are increasingly burdened with debt.
And it doesn't matter if we look at investment grade or speculative grade
companies,
the balance sheets are increasingly loaded with debt and their ratio to the a
bitter generated.
Rubbing.
If you have this, you should be when investing.
If you don't want to run the risk of having a very unpleasant surprise in the
next few years, over the past few years,
we have seen many companies pay dividends and buy back shares using more and
more debt. And now the coronavirus may end up turning everything up.
Just to give you an idea over the next one.
UBS companies will need to refinance more than $1.5 trillion in high yield
bonds. Many of them junk bonds.
Anyway, there you have it.
This is the situation creating what many analysts consider the biggest risk
ingredient for a future crisis on wall street. But what do you think,
do you think that this model is sustainable?
Or do you think that this immense accumulation of debt will lead us to a new
financial crisis instead will wall street be building its castle on a foundation
of sand, Your answers in the comments?
So I really hope you've enjoyed this video. Please hit, like if you did,
and don't forget to subscribe for brand new videos,
don't forget to check out our friends at the reconsider media podcast stay
provided the vocals in this episode that weren't mine. Also,
this channel is possible because of Patrion and our patrons on that platform.
So please consider joining them and supporting our mission of providing
independent political coverage. And as always, I'll see you in the next.
And if you want to learn more about politics and hear even more of my lovely
voice, you can join us at reconsider media.
We have a podcast@reconsidermedia.com slash podcast. See you there.